Experiment 1
The goal of Experiment were two-fold. The first of these aims was to investigate whether adults blocked (i.e., show retrospective reevaluation) as indicated by the drop in the causal rating of B both before the backwards-blocking event was shown as well as after the event was shown. A second, perhaps less central aim of Experiment 1 was to replicate previous findings with children in the IS, 1C, and 2C conditions. It should be mentioned again that, to our knowledge, this is just the second study to use and pre-post rating design to assess causal judgement and inference in either a blicket-detector task or other non-blicket-detector tasks.  

Method

Participants. The participants were 60 introductory psychology students who participated for college credit from Carnegie Mellon University. Four additional participants were tested but not included because of experimental error. 


Materials. Consistent with previous research by Gopnik and colleagues (e.g., Gopnik et al., 2001; Sobel et al., 2004), a blicket-detector device was used in this study. This device measured 5" x 7" x 3, was constructed from wood, and had a white semilucent top. The machine operated via a remote control that was connected to the body of the device via an insulated electrical wire. It should be noted that the wire that ran from the box to the remote control was hidden from view and was intended to give the impression that the machine activated in teh presence of objects with causal power; that is, the ability of an object to generate or produce an effect. When the button on the remote control was pressed and the object predetermined to be the blicket was placed on the blicket device, lights and music--which were programmed within the box--began to play. Note that the music and the lights and music were programmed to begin flashing and playing in synchronny  without delay when the button was pressed. When the button on the remote was not pressed, the lights and music neither began to flash or play. Importantly, the button was not pressed when objects that were not predetermined to be blickets were placed on the surface of the blicket machine. 
In addition to the use of the blicket machine, 8 differently colored cube and cylinder objects were used, each 1" in diameter. No object of the same shaped served as the blicket and the object that served as the blicket was counterbalanced across subjects. Finally, two unrelated objects were used in the pretest phase of the experiment. 

Procedure. All participants were tested in a quite testing room. Participants were initially introduced to the machine and told that the machine was called a blicket detector at the beginning of the experiment. Participants were additionally informed that the machine activated by playing music and emitting light only when blickets were placed on teh surface of the machine and that their job was to determine which of a series of objects were blickets based on the pattern of activation and inactivation. Thus, objects predetermined to be blickets (or not) were not explictly noted to participants. Following this brief introduction, participants were then given two pretest trials. In one of the pretest trials, one of the two unrelated objected was shown to activate the detector and, as such, was labeled a blicket. In the other pretest trial, the other of the two unrelated objects (both objects were randomly determined) was shown not to activate the detector and, as such, was not labeled a blicket. The purpose of both pretest trials was to ensure that participants understood had blicket objects were determined and to ensure that they understood had device activated. 

Following these two pretest trials, participants were given 4 counterbalanced test trials. These test trials were meant to be identical to those used in previous blicket-detector studies and included the one-cause (1C), two-cause (2C), indirect screening-off (IS), and backwards-blocking (BB) trials.  In the 1C trial, object A activated the detector when placed on the machine by itself but object B did not activate the machine when it was placed on the machine by itself. Both objects were then placed on the machine twice and the machine activated both times. In the 2C trial, object A was intially placed on the machine 3 times and each time the machine activated. Object B was then placed on the machine 3 times; however, the first time object B was placed on the machine, the machine failed to activate but activated the remaining two times that the object was placed on the machine. In the IS test trial, object A and B were placed on the machine together twice and the machine activated both times. Object A was then placed on the machine by itself and the machine failed to activate. The BB test trial was identical to the IS test trial with the exception that object A activated the detector. Note that both before and after each of the four conditions were shown, participants were instructed to rate the likelihood that object A (or B) was a blicket, where a rating of 0 indicated that object A (or B) was "absolutely not" a blicket and a rating of 100 indicated that object A (or B) was "absolutely" a blicket. 

The purpose of the pre- and post-rating phase to allow adults to update their causal ratings of object A and B. Note also that the 1C and 2C conditions served as control conditions to ensure that participants understood the events. The introduction of a pre- and post-rating phase is a key difference between this study (and experiment) and previous blicket-detector studies and allow us to assess whether participants assign different ratings to objects A and B between the pre- and post-rating phases across all 4 conditions. Recall that models that use a simple associative learning rule such as the Rescorla-Wagner learning rule to assign causal ratings to object A and B rate object B equivalently in both conditions. However, models that use rules such as a simplfied version of Bayes' rule assign different causal ratings to object B in both the BB and IS conditions. 



Results

All analyses were conducted in R. 